✅ Cursor vs Offset Pagination (Interview-Ready Version)
1️⃣ Offset is used when page numbering is required

✔️ Correct.

Offset-based pagination is ideal when UI needs:

Page 1, 2, 3...

Jump to page 79

“Last page”

Example (using will_paginate):

User.paginate(page: params[:page], per_page: 10)
2️⃣ Offset is useful when dataset is not huge

✔️ Mostly correct.

More precisely:

Offset works fine for small to medium datasets.
It becomes slow for very large tables because large OFFSET values require scanning many rows.

Problem:

LIMIT 10 OFFSET 500000;

Database must scan 500k rows before returning 10.

3️⃣ Offset may provide duplicate results

✔️ Correct — but refine explanation.

Duplicates or missing records can happen when:

New rows are inserted

Rows are deleted

While user is navigating pages

Because offset depends on row position, and row positions shift.

4️⃣ Cursor is useful when dataset is large

✔️ Correct.

Because it avoids OFFSET scanning.

Instead of:

OFFSET 500000

It uses:

WHERE id > 500000

Which uses index efficiently.

5️⃣ Cursor is useful for sequential UI (Next / Previous)

✔️ Correct.

Cursor pagination is designed for:

Next page

Previous page

Infinite scroll

It is sequential by nature.

6️⃣ Cursor is not useful for page number UI

✔️ Correct.

Cursor pagination cannot directly jump to:

Page 50

Last page

Arbitrary page

Because it does not understand row positions.

7️⃣ Cursor may provide duplicate results if unique indexing of column is not there

⚠️ Small correction:

It’s not about indexing.

It’s about non-unique ordering column.

Better version:

Cursor pagination can produce duplicates or missing records if the ORDER BY column is not unique. To fix this, we use a composite cursor (e.g., created_at + id) to ensure deterministic ordering.

Index helps performance.
Uniqueness ensures correctness.

They are different concepts.

8️⃣ Cursor is useful for scrolling UI

✔️ Correct.

Used in:

Feeds

Notifications

APIs

Mobile apps

Examples:

Instagram

Twitter

LinkedIn

They don’t show page numbers — they use cursor.

🎯 Clean Final Comparison (Perfect for Interview)
Offset Pagination

Supports page numbers

Allows random page jump

Simple to implement

Slower for large datasets

Can cause duplicates/missing records when data changes

Cursor Pagination

No page numbers

Sequential navigation only

Fast for large datasets

More stable during inserts/deletes

Requires unique, deterministic ordering

🎤 30-Second Interview Summary

You can say:

Offset pagination uses LIMIT and OFFSET and is suitable for page-number-based UIs. However, it becomes slow for large datasets and can produce inconsistent results when data changes. Cursor pagination uses a reference value like id or created_at instead of row positions, making it more efficient and consistent for large or frequently updated datasets. It is ideal for APIs and infinite scrolling but does not support random page jumps.

🔥 That answer sounds architect-level.