🟢 First: In a Proper System, They Are Different

Even though both are JWTs, they are not meant for the same purpose.

Best practice is to differentiate them using a claim like:

{
  "user_id": 5,
  "exp": 1700000000,
  "type": "access"
}

And refresh token:

{
  "user_id": 5,
  "exp": 1700600000,
  "type": "refresh"
}
🔴 Case 1: If You DO NOT Check Token Type (Bad Design)

If both tokens:

Use same secret

Have valid signature

Are not expired

Then server might accept refresh token as valid authentication.

That is a security mistake ❌

Because refresh token:

Has longer expiry

Should not be used for accessing APIs

This is a common beginner mistake.

🟢 Case 2: Proper Implementation (Correct Design)

In a secure system, when request comes:

Server should:

Decode token

Verify signature

Check expiration

Check token type

Example:

payload = JWT.decode(token, secret, true, algorithm: 'HS256')

raise "Invalid token type" unless payload["type"] == "access"

If someone sends refresh token:

Server returns:

401 Unauthorized
Invalid token type

Correct behavior ✅

🔐 Why This Matters (Security Reason)

Refresh token:

Lives longer (7–30 days)

If allowed for API access → attacker gets long-term access

Access token:

Short-lived (15 minutes)

Designed for API authorization

So they must be separated logically.

🟢 Even More Secure Approach (Advanced)

Some systems go further:

Use different secrets for access and refresh tokens

Or use different verification logic

Or do NOT use JWT for refresh (use random string stored in DB)

That way:

Even if someone tries to use refresh token for API → verification fails immediately.

🧠 Interview-Ready Answer

If interviewer asks:

What happens if someone uses refresh token instead of access token?

You answer:

In a properly implemented system, the server validates not only the signature and expiration but also the token type. If a refresh token is sent to access protected APIs, the server should reject it with a 401 Unauthorized response. If the system does not differentiate between token types, it becomes a security vulnerability because refresh tokens usually have longer lifetimes.

That’s a strong answer.

🔥 Bonus: Follow-up Question They Might Ask

How do you differentiate access and refresh tokens?

Answer:

Add type claim in payload

Use different secrets

Or store refresh tokens in DB and validate against DB

You’re now thinking like a backend engineer 👌

Next question you should ask:

👉 What is token rotation?
👉 What is jti claim?
👉 How to revoke refresh tokens properly?
👉 How to prevent refresh token replay attacks?

Pick one and we go deeper.