You’re confused about:

2️⃣ Rails uses the configured trusted ADFS public certificate
What does that actually mean?

Let’s slow it down.

🔐 What Is This “Configured Trusted Certificate”?

When integrating with Active Directory Federation Services, the IT team gives you:

Either an IdP metadata XML file

Or an X.509 public certificate

That certificate belongs to ADFS.

It contains:

-----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----
MIIDdzCCAl+gAwIBAgI...
-----END CERTIFICATE-----

That is ADFS’s public key certificate.

🏗 Where Does Rails Put It?

In your Rails app (using omniauth-saml), you configure:

provider :saml,
  idp_cert: ENV['ADFS_PUBLIC_CERT']

So Rails now says:

"I trust ONLY signatures verified by this certificate."

That is what “configured trusted certificate” means.

It is NOT dynamically fetched from the response.

It is pre-configured and trusted.

🧠 Think of It Like This

Before any login happens:

Rails already knows:

Only accept signatures from THIS public key.

That’s step 2.

🔎 Why Is This Important?

Imagine if Rails did this instead:

Extract certificate from SAML response

Use that certificate to verify signature

🚨 That would be insecure.

Because attacker could:

Generate their own key pair

Sign fake SAML response

Include their own certificate

Trick your app

That’s why Rails must already have a trusted certificate configured.

🔁 So Step 2 Means

When SAML response arrives:

Rails does NOT ask:

“Which certificate should I trust?”

Rails already knows.

It uses the one stored in config.

🔐 Full Mental Model

Before runtime:

Rails config:
Trusted IdP certificate = ADFS Public Certificate

At runtime:

SAML response arrives
↓
Extract SignatureValue
↓
Use configured public certificate
↓
Verify signature

That’s it.

🎯 Interview-Level Explanation

If interviewer asks:

How does the SP know which certificate to use for verification?

You say:

During SAML integration, the IdP’s public X.509 certificate is configured in the Rails application. When a SAML response is received, we verify the signature using this pre-configured trusted certificate rather than trusting any certificate included in the response.

🔥 That shows you understand trust boundaries.

🧠 One Final Clarification

Step 2 is NOT:

“Rails downloads certificate every time.”

It is:

“Rails already trusts one specific certificate, configured during integration.”

If this part is now clear, next we should cover:

👉 What happens during certificate rotation in ADFS
Because that’s a real production issue and interviewers love asking it.