🔐 What IdP Metadata Is Used For

IdP metadata (from Active Directory Federation Services) is used for:

Initial configuration

Getting signing certificates

Getting SSO endpoints

Supporting certificate rotation

It is configuration data, not runtime authentication data.

🚫 Do We Fetch Metadata On Every Login?

No.

That would be:

Slow

Unnecessary

Risky (network dependency during login)

Authentication must be fast and reliable.

🏗 How It Actually Works in Real Systems

There are 3 common approaches:

✅ Option 1 — Static Certificate (Basic Setup)

You:

Download metadata once.

Extract certificate.

Put it in Rails config.

idp_cert: ENV['ADFS_PUBLIC_CERT']

You only update it when IT rotates cert.

✅ Option 2 — Metadata Parsed at App Boot (Better)

When Rails starts:

OneLogin::RubySaml::IdpMetadataParser.new.parse_remote(
  "https://adfs.company.com/FederationMetadata.xml"
)

It fetches metadata once at startup.

After that:

Uses cached config in memory

Does NOT hit metadata on every login

✅ Option 3 — Scheduled Metadata Refresh (Enterprise Level)

Best practice:

Background job fetches metadata daily

Updates stored certificate if changed

App continues using local trusted config

This handles rotation safely.

🔁 What Happens During Authentication?

When user logs in:

SAML Response arrives

Rails verifies signature

Rails uses already-loaded certificate

No metadata fetch.

🧠 Important Concept

Metadata is:

👉 For trust configuration
👉 Not for per-request validation

🎯 Interview-Level Answer

If interviewer asks:

Do you fetch IdP metadata on every authentication?

You say:

No. Metadata is used to configure trust and obtain signing certificates. In production systems, it is either loaded at application startup or refreshed periodically. During authentication, we validate the SAML response using the already trusted certificate without making external metadata calls.

🔥 That shows performance + reliability thinking.

💥 If You Did Fetch Metadata Every Time…

Problems:

Login delays

Failure if IdP metadata endpoint is temporarily unavailable

Increased load

Bad architecture

Enterprise systems avoid that.

🧠 Clean Mental Model
Metadata = Configuration
SAML Response = Authentication Message

They are separate layers.

Now we’re ready for an important real-world scenario:

👉 What happens if IdP publishes TWO signing certificates in metadata?