3️⃣ Error Handling Strategy (Professional API Design)

Now comes the part many candidates fail.

Goal of Error Handling

Consistent format

Proper HTTP status codes

Clear error messages

No sensitive info leakage

Standard Error JSON Format

Example:

{
  "error": {
    "code": "VALIDATION_ERROR",
    "message": "Email is required",
    "details": {
      "email": ["can't be blank"]
    }
  }
}
Types of Errors
🔹 1. Validation Errors

Return:

422 Unprocessable Entity

Example:

Email missing

Password too short

🔹 2. Authentication Errors
401 Unauthorized

Example:

Invalid token

Expired token

🔹 3. Authorization Errors
403 Forbidden

Example:

User not allowed to delete course

🔹 4. Not Found
404 Not Found
🔹 5. Server Errors
500 Internal Server Error

But:

❌ Never expose stack traces in production.

Rails Best Practice (If Asked)

In Rails:

Use rescue_from in ApplicationController

Create custom exceptions

Return consistent JSON

Example:

rescue_from ActiveRecord::RecordNotFound do
  render json: { error: "Not Found" }, status: :not_found
end
What Interviewer Wants to Hear

Say this clearly:

My error handling strategy focuses on consistency, proper HTTP status codes, structured JSON responses, and centralized exception handling using middleware or ApplicationController. I ensure no sensitive information is leaked in production.

🎯 Final Interview Summary (You Can Memorize This)

If interviewer says:

"Explain REST principles, JWT flow and error handling"

You can say:

REST APIs are resource-based, use proper HTTP methods, return meaningful HTTP status codes, and must be stateless. Stateless means the server does not store client session state, and each request contains authentication information like a JWT token.

For authentication, I use JWT with access and refresh tokens. Access tokens are short-lived and sent in the Authorization header. Refresh tokens are long-lived and used to generate new access tokens without re-login.

For error handling, I follow a consistent JSON structure, use proper HTTP status codes like 401, 403, 422, and centralize exception handling in Rails using rescue_from to avoid code duplication and prevent sensitive data exposure.